Add new section on scoping JS code (#13041)
WordPress/gutenberg: docs/designers-developers/developers/tutorials/javascript/scope-your-code.md

# Scope your code

Historically, JavaScript files loaded in a web page share the same scope. This means that a global variable declared in one file will be seen by the code in other files.

To see how this works, create a web page that loads three JavaScript files. The `first.js` file will be:

```js
var pluginName = 'MyPlugin';
console.log( 'Plugin name is ', pluginName );
```

Let's create `second.js` as:

```js
var pluginName = 'DifferentPlugin';
console.log( 'Plugin name is ', pluginName );
```

And, finally, `third.js`:

```js
console.log( 'Plugin name is ', pluginName );
```

> When loaded on the same page, `first.js` and `second.js` will output the plugin name declared within itself. They will override the value of the global `pluginName` variable if one was already declared. It's not known what gets printed in the console when `third.js` is executed, though - it depends on the value of the global `pluginName` variable when `third.js` is executed, which will depend on the files load order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 When loaded on the same page, `first.js` and `second.js` will output the plugin name declared within itself. They will override the value of the global `pluginName` variable if one was already declared. It's not known what gets printed in the console when `third.js` is executed, though - it depends on the value of the global `pluginName` variable when `third.js` is executed, which will depend on the order the files are loaded.
```

> This behavior is problematic and the reason we need to scope the code, to prevent values unexpectedly changing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 This behavior can be problematic, and the reason we need to scope the code. By scoping the code—ensuring each file is isolated from each other—we can prevent values unexpectedly changing.
```

This is `first.js` written as an IIFE:

```js
( function() {
	var pluginName = 'MyPlugin';
	console.log( 'Plugin name is ', pluginName );
} )( )
```

And this is `second.js`:

```js
( function() {
	var pluginName = 'DifferentPlugin';
	console.log( 'Plugin name is ', pluginName );
} )( )
```

And this is `third.js`:

```js
( function() {
	console.log( 'Plugin name is ', pluginName );
} )( )
```

The code in `first.js` and `second.js` is unaffected by other variables in the global scope, so it's safe and deterministic.

On the other hand, `third.js` doesn't declare a `pluginName` variable, but needs to be provided one. IIFEs still allow you to take a variable from the global scope and pass it into your function. Provided that there was a global `window.pluginName` variable, we could rewrite `third.js` as:

```js
( function( name ) {
	console.log( 'Plugin name is ', name );
} )( window.pluginName )
```

## Future changes

At the beginning we mentioned that:

> Historically, JavaScript files loaded in a web page share the same scope.

Notice the _historically_.

> JavaScript has evolved quite a bit since its creation. As of 2015, the language supports modules, also known as _ES6 modules_, that introduce separate scope per file: a global variable in `first.js` wouldn't be exposed to `second.js`. This feature is already [supported by modern browsers](https://caniuse.com/#feat=es6-module), but not all of them do. If your code needs to run in browsers that don't support modules, your last resort is using IIFEs.

Reviewer 2: My intent was making this as free as jargon as possible as to make it more palatable to people not exposed to modern JavaScript just yet, that's why I only hinted at ES6 by the end of the file.

One way I think this tutorial could be expanded is by adding a section that includes a minimum viable mechanism to compile from ES6 to ES5 (including JSX). I was tempted to adapt [my own dumb webpack](http://nosolosoftware.com/on-javascript-modules/) explanation for the handbook. Upon sleeping on it, I think that a better use of everyone's time (the writer and the reader) will be to walk the reader through a minimal setup instead - that way we give developers an easy and practical way to get started and avoid the analysis paralysis.

> JavaScript has evolved quite a bit since its creation. As of 2015, the language supports modules, also known as _ES6 modules_, that introduce separate scope per file: a global variable in `first.js` wouldn't be exposed to `second.js`. This feature is already [supported by modern browsers](https://caniuse.com/#feat=es6-module), but not all of them do. If your code needs to run in browsers that don't support modules, your last resort is using IIFEs.

Reviewer 3: A separate tutorial for build setup would be good, but we should probably wait for @wordpress/scripts improvements first and use it instead of using the tools directly cc @gziolo. I was more thinking of a random person arriving into this tutorial. They might already use ES6. So just a small note at the beginning could be useful IMO.

> JavaScript has evolved quite a bit since its creation. As of 2015, the language supports modules, also known as _ES6 modules_, that introduce separate scope per file: a global variable in `first.js` wouldn't be exposed to `second.js`. This feature is already [supported by modern browsers](https://caniuse.com/#feat=es6-module), but not all of them do. If your code needs to run in browsers that don't support modules, your last resort is using IIFEs.

Reviewer 4: Yes, I think we will need to add a tutorial about using `wp-scripts` in your project. There are three things that need happen before we can start promoting it:
- [Scripts: Add support for start and build scripts to the package](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/12837)
- [Re-use webpack and babel config for build script](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/12685)
- All packages needs to be published to npm

> JavaScript has evolved quite a bit since its creation. As of 2015, the language supports modules, also known as _ES6 modules_, that introduce separate scope per file: a global variable in `first.js` wouldn't be exposed to `second.js`. This feature is already [supported by modern browsers](https://caniuse.com/#feat=es6-module), but not all of them do. If your code needs to run in browsers that don't support modules, your last resort is using IIFEs.

Reviewer 2: I'd love to! Ping me in any PR that lacks a reviewer and I'll be there. When pieces are in place, I can also pair to write the tutorial.

# Scope your code

Historically, JavaScript files loaded by the same document share the same scope. This means that a global variable declared in a file will be seen by the code in other files.

This is `one.js` file:

```js
var yourPluginName = 'MyPlugin';
console.log( 'Plugin name is ', yourPluginName );
```

This is `two.js` file:

```js
var yourPluginName = 'YourPlugin';
var yourName = 'A great JS developer!';

> console.log( 'Plugin ', yourPluginName, ' authored by ', yourName );

Reviewer 2: Rewrote the example.

```

If you load them both in a page, they'll overwrite each other global variables.

> **First step: scope the code within a function**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scoping code within a function
```

> In order to fix this, you need to scope your code. In JavaScript, you do this by writing it within a function, because they create a _local scope_. And, to prevent polluting the global scope with your function's name, you should write your code within an _anonymous_ function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In JavaScript, you can scope your code by writing it within a function. Functions have "local scope", or a scope that is specific only to that function. You can also write an "anonymous function" which will also prevent your function name from being overridden in the global scope.
```

Scoped `one.js` code:

```js
function() {
	var yourPluginName = 'my plugin';
	console.log( 'Plugin name is ', yourPluginName );
}
```

And `two.js`:

```js
function() {
	var yourName = 'A great JS developer!';
	console.log( 'Plugin ', yourPluginName, ' authored by ', yourName );
}
```

> With this trick, the different files won't override each other. They also won't work as intended! Nothing will be displayed in the console because these functions are being called by no one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this trick, the different files won't override each other's variables. Unfortunately, they also won't work, because these functions are being called by no one. We've only _defined_ the functions; we haven't _executed_ them yet.
```

> **2. Make it so the function is executed when is loaded**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Automatically execute anonymous functions
```

The problem is, how do you execute anonymous functions in JavaScript? It turns out there are a few ways, but the most popular is this:

```js
( function() {
	// your code goes here

> } )()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
} )( )
```

```

> You wrap your function between parenthesis, and then call it like any other named function. This pattern is known as [Immediately-Invoked Function Expression](http://benalman.com/news/2010/11/immediately-invoked-function-expression/), or IIFE for short.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You wrap your function between parentheses, and then call it like any other named function. This pattern is known as [Immediately-Invoked Function Expression](http://benalman.com/news/2010/11/immediately-invoked-function-expression/), or IIFE for short.
```

This is `one.js` written as an IIFE:

```js
( function() {
	var yourPluginName = 'my plugin';
	console.log( 'Plugin name is ', yourPluginName );
} )( )
```

And this is `two.js`:

```js
( function() {
	var yourName = 'A great JS developer!';
	console.log( 'Plugin ', yourPluginName, ' authored by ', yourName );
} )( )
```

> It's important not to forget that these are just regular functions, so they can take parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may also have noticed the parentheses at the end of the code sample as well. This allows you to take a variable from the global scope and pass it into your function. For example, below we pass the `window.wp` variable into our function as the `wordpress` function parameter:
```

```js
( function( wordpress ) {
	console.log( 'WordPress is ', wordpress );
} )( window.wp )
```

> **Coda**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Future changes
```

At the beginning we mentioned that:

> 	> Historically, JavaScript files loaded by same document share the same scope.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Historically, JavaScript files loaded in a web page share the same scope.
```
